Getting started part3 draft (#5)
pgruetter/sdl-docs: docs/getting-started/part-3/custom-webservice.md

  baseUrl = "https://opensky-network.org/api/flights/departure"
  nRetry = 5
  queryParameters = [{
    airport = "LSZB"
    begin = 1641393602
    end = 1641483739
  },{
    airport = "EDDF"
    begin = 1641393602
    end = 1641483739
  }]
  timeouts {
    connectionTimeoutMs = 200000
    readTimeoutMs = 200000
  }
}
```
  
The Configuration for this new `ext-departures` includes the type of the Data Object, the expected schema, the base url, where we can fetch the departures, the number of retries, a list of query parameters and timeout options. To have more flexibility we can configure the query parameters now as options instead defining them in the query string. The connection timeout corresponds to the time we wait until the connection is established and the read timeout equals the time we wait until the webservice responds after the request has been submitted. If for example the request cannot be answered in the time configured, we try to automatically resend the request. How many times a failed request will be resend, is controlled by the nRetry parameter.

> :::warning

Reviewer: We could remove this whole block, if we just add a small if condition that puts `end` to `now` or to 4 days after `begin` if the time range gets too big. This way, we can also re-execute the job multiple times and it would always load a delta.

Author: done.

    .select(explode($"response").as("record"))
    .select("record.*")
    .withColumn("created_at", current_timestamp())
  
  // put simple nextState logic below
  
  // return
   departuresDf
}
```
Don't be confused about some of the comments in the code. They will be of use in the next chapter. If you rebuild the docker image and then restart the program you should see that we do not query the API twice anymore.

## Preserve schema

With this implementation we write the spark data frame of our CustomWebserviceDataObject again in Json format. As a consequence, we loose the schema definition when the Data is read again. To mitigate this behaviour it is beneficial to directly use the `ext-departures` as *inputId* in the `deduplicate-departures` Action. Consequently the first transformer has to be rewritten as well, since the input has changed. Please replace it with the implementation below
```
{
  type = SQLDfTransformer
  code = "select ext_departures.*, date_format(from_unixtime(firstseen),'yyyyMMdd') dt from ext_departures"
}
```
The old Action `download-departures` can be commented out or deleted.

> At the end your config file should look somehting like [this](../config-examples/application-download-part3-custom-webservice.conf) and the Data Object like [this](../config-examples/CustomWebserviceDataObject-1.scala).

Reviewer 2: So I guess now I should execute the feed compute-departures, right? 
When I try to execute it with the provided Files it fails because it cannot connect to the metastore:
`Caused by: ERROR 08001: java.net.UnknownHostException : Error connecting to server metastore on port 1,527 with message metastore.
        at org.apache.derby.client.net.NetAgent.<init>(Unknown Source)
        at org.apache.derby.client.net.NetConnection.newAgent_(Unknown Source)
        at org.apache.derby.client.am.ClientConnection.<init>(Unknown Source)
        at org.apache.derby.client.net.NetConnection.<init>(Unknown Source)
        at org.apache.derby.client.net.ClientJDBCObjectFactoryImpl.newNetConnection(Unknown Source)
        ... 97 more
Caused by: java.net.UnknownHostException: metastore
`
Does this tutorial expect you to have run docker-compose up before so that the metastore is running?
It looks like it, so I suggest to explain that in the beginning of the tutorial.
Also, I suggest to update the docker command to run sdl so that --network getting-started_default is included, so that it actually finds the metastore.

I also get the error when I try to run SDL directly with IntelliJ. How does your setup look like so that intelliJ communicates with the metastore?

Author: If you run it within intellij please comment out the following lines in the application.conf
    #"spark.hadoop.javax.jdo.option.ConnectionURL" = "jdbc:derby://metastore:1527/db;create=true"
    #"spark.hadoop.javax.jdo.option.ConnectionDriverName" = "org.apache.derby.jdbc.ClientDriver"
    #"spark.hadoop.javax.jdo.option.ConnectionUserName" = "sa"
    #"spark.hadoop.javax.jdo.option.ConnectionPassword" = "1234"
And yes, the docker-compose containers should be running, otherwise it will not find the metastore.

---
id: custom-webservice
title: Custom Webservice
---

## Goal
  In the previous examples we worked mainly with data that was available as a file or could be fetched with the built-in `WebserviceFileDataObject`. To fetch data from a webservice the `WebserviceFileDataObject` is sometimes not enough and has to be customized. The reason why the built-in Data Object is not sufficient, is manifold, but it's connected to the way Webservices are designed. Webservices often include design features like: 
* data pagination
* protect resources using rate limiting 
* different authentication mechanisms

> * ...

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* filters for incremental load
* well defined schema
* ...
```

As a result one is often better off writing a CustomWebserviceDataObject tailored to the API of interest than trying to write a generic WebserviceDataObejct that covers all needs. 
The goal of this part is to learn how such a CustomWebserviceDataObject can be implemented.

:::tip

> As we are really developing code in this part of the tutorial, it might be a good idea to configure a working development evironment. In the Technical Setup chaptor we introduced the possibilty how one can use intellij for the development. Please [visit](../setup.md) for a more elobarte development experience than manipulating the file in simple text editor.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
As we are really developing code in this part of the tutorial, it might be a good idea to configure a working development evironment. In the Technical Setup chapter we introduced the possibilty how one can use Intellij for the development. Please [visit](../setup.md) for a more elaborate development experience than manipulating the file in simple text editor.
```

```
ext-departures {
  type = CustomWebserviceDataObject
  baseUrl = "https://opensky-network.org/api/flights/departure"
  nRetry = 5
  queryParameters = [{
    airport="LSZB"
    begin=1639609200
    end=1639868400
  },{
    airport="EDDF"
    begin=1639609200
    end=1639868400
  }]
  timeouts {
    connectionTimeoutMs=200000
    readTimeoutMs=200000
  }
}
```

  
The Configuration for this new `ext-departures` includes the type of the Data Object, the base url, where we can fetch the departures, the number of retries, a list of query parameters and timeout options. To have more flexibility we can configure the query parameters now as options instead defining them in the query string. The connection timeout corresponds to the time we wait until the connection is established and the read timeout equals the time we wait until the webservice responds after the request has been submitted. If for example the request cannot be answered in the time configured, we try to automatically resend the request. How many times a failed request will be resend, is controlled by the nRetry parameter.

:::warning

>   For the *begin* and *end* you should **not** choose an interval that is larger than a week. Otherwise the webservice will not respond. As the configuration must be as a unix timestamp, have a look at this [website](https://www.unixtimestamp.com/).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  For the *begin* and *end* you should **not** choose an interval that is larger than a week. Otherwise the webservice will not respond. As the configuration must be as unix timestamp, have a look at this [website](https://www.unixtimestamp.com/).
```

:::

To make the Data Object of type `CustomWebserviceDataObject` available the following three files had to be included in our project:  
  - ./src/scala/io/smartdatalake/workflow/dataobject/CustomWebserviceDataObject.scala
  - ./src/scala/io/smartdatalake/util/webservice/ScalaCustomWebserviceClient.scala
  - ./src/scala/io/smartdatalake/util/webservice/WebserviceMethod.scala

In this part we will work exclusively with the `CustomWebserviceDataObject.scala` file.

## Define Action
In the config we change again only one action, namely:
```
download-departures {
  type = CopyAction
  inputId = ext-departures
  outputId = stg-departures
  metadata {
    feed = download-departures
  }
}
```

> The type is no longer `FileTransferAction`, but instead `CopyAction`. We also changed the feed name. For this part we are mainly interested exectuting this action.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The type is no longer `FileTransferAction`, but instead a `CopyAction`, as our new `CustomWebserviceDataObject` converts the Json-Output of the Webservice into a Spark DataFrame. We also changed the feed name. For this part we are mainly interested executing this action.
```

## Try it out
Re-Build the docker image to update the Scala files and then execute this specific feed using the command below
```
  docker build -t smart-data-lake/gs1 .
  docker run --rm -v ${PWD}/data:/mnt/data -v ${PWD}/config:/mnt/config smart-data-lake/gs1:latest --config /mnt/config --feed-sel download-departures
```

> Nothing should have changed. You should again receive the data as json files in the corresponding `stg-departures` folder. But except of receiving the departures for only one airport the Data Object returns the departures for all configured airports. In this specific case this would be *LSZB* and *EDDF* with the corresponding time window.

Reviewer 3: Its not so smart to write the Spark DataFrame of our CustomWebserviceDataObject again in Json Format, as we loose the schema definition in Json Format. I suggest to remove stg-departure, and write directly into a DeltaLakeTableDataObject in int-layer.

Reviewer: @hiltpold : this should also be done, right?

Author: @pgruetter: It's implemented. Please check the newest version.

## Get Data Frame
In this section we will learn how we can avoid sending the requests twice to the API using the execution phase information provided by the smart data lake. We will now implement a simple *if ... else* statement that allows us to simply define the schema of the expected response in the **Init** phase and to actually query the data in the **Exec** phase. We start by defining the *schema* instance variable below
```scala
private var schema : Option[ArrayType] = None
```
in the beginning of the class `CustomWebserviceDataObject`. The previously discussed logic is enclosed in two `// REPLACE BLOCK` comments. Find this section and replace it with the code below
```scala

> if(context.phase == ExecutionPhase.Init){

Reviewer 3: We could get the Schema of the case class with `Encoders.product[Departure]`

    StructField("lastSeen", IntegerType),
    StructField("estArrivalAirport", StringType),
    StructField("callsign", StringType),
    StructField("estDepartureAirportHorizDistance", IntegerType),
    StructField("estDepartureAirportVertDistance", IntegerType),
    StructField("estArrivalAirportHorizDistance", IntegerType),
    StructField("estArrivalAirportVertDistance", IntegerType),
    StructField("departureAirportCandidatesCount", IntegerType),
    StructField("arrivalAirportCandidatesCount", IntegerType)
  ))))

  // simply return an empty data frame
  session.emptyDataFrame
} else {
  // place the new implementation of currentQueryParameters below     

  // given the query parameters, generate all requests
  val departureRequests = currentQueryParameters.map(
    param => s"${baseUrl}?airport=${param.airport}&begin=${param.begin}&end=${param.end}"
  )
  // make request
  val departuresResponses = departureRequests.map(request(_))

  // create dataframe with the correct schema and add created_at column with the current timestamp
  val departuresDf = departuresResponses.toDF("responseBinary")
    .withColumn("responseString", byte2String($"responseBinary"))

>     .select(from_json($"responseString", schema.get).as("response"))

Reviewer 3: Now i'm confused, because earlier you parsed Json with json4s...

  session.emptyDataFrame
} else {
  // place the new implementation of currentQueryParameters below     

  // given the query parameters, generate all requests
  val departureRequests = currentQueryParameters.map(
    param => s"${baseUrl}?airport=${param.airport}&begin=${param.begin}&end=${param.end}"
  )
  // make request
  val departuresResponses = departureRequests.map(request(_))

  // create dataframe with the correct schema and add created_at column with the current timestamp
  val departuresDf = departuresResponses.toDF("responseBinary")
    .withColumn("responseString", byte2String($"responseBinary"))
    .select(from_json($"responseString", schema.get).as("response"))
    .withColumn("created_at", current_timestamp())
    .select(explode($"response").as("record"), $"created_at")
    .select("record.*", "created_at")
  
  // put simple nextState logic below

  departuresDf
}
```
We see that we we need to so some transformations to flatten the result returned by the API. Spark has lots of *User-Defined Functions* (short **udf**) that can be used out of the box. We used such a column based function *from_json* to parse the response string with the right schema.

:::tip

> The return type of the response is `Array[Byte]`. To convert that to `Array[String]` the *udf* function `byte2String `has been used. This function is a nice example how one can define such *udfs* by oneselfs.

Reviewer 2: I guess you should define that URL in the tutorial then? It s not included in the file CustomWebserviceDataObject-1.scala so as a reader I'm confused here and I was actually googling byte2String to see if it was a predefined udf :D
